Detecting Driver DropOff in Ride-Hailing: A Strategic Benchmark Approach
  
Driver Dropoff is a major cost driver and service bottleneck in ride-hailing. If too many drivers leave the platform without replacement, it affects rider experience (longer wait times), driver morale (overload), and platform revenue. Proactively identifying churn allows for timely re-engagement or planning for new driver acquisition.

How Can We Identify When a Driver Has Left?
Since drivers don’t officially “resign” from the app, we rely on behavioral data such as inactivity periods. If a driver hasn’t completed a ride in a defined number of days, they are considered inactive or churned.

Recommended Benchmark
We define dropoff based on the number of days since a driver's last completed ride.

Status	Definition
Active	Ride completed in the last 14 days
At-Risk	No rides in the last 15–30 days
Soft Churn	No rides in 31–60 days
Hard Churn	No rides in 60+ days

Default Benchmark: No rides in 30+ days = churned

This aligns with industry norms where consistent engagement is expected weekly or bi-weekly.

Why 30 Days?
Behavioral Insight: Active drivers typically complete rides weekly. A 30-day break strongly signals disengagement.

Operational Fit: Monthly cycles match payment, bonus, and scheduling routines.

Industry Alignment: Uber uses similar windows to flag disengaged drivers.

-- SQL To Detect

SELECT driver_id,
       MAX(ride_date) AS last_ride,
       CURRENT_DATE - MAX(ride_date) AS days_inactive,
       CASE
         WHEN CURRENT_DATE - MAX(ride_date) <= 14 THEN 'Active'
         WHEN CURRENT_DATE - MAX(ride_date) <= 30 THEN 'At-Risk'
         WHEN CURRENT_DATE - MAX(ride_date) <= 60 THEN 'Soft Churn'
         ELSE 'Hard Churn'
       END AS churn_status
FROM rides
GROUP BY driver_id;

Business Value
  
Prevents Supply Shortfalls: Early detection allows for re-engagement or replacement planning

Reduces Onboarding Costs: Retaining drivers is more cost-effective than recruiting new ones

Supports Incentive Targeting: Helps design smart bonus or loyalty campaigns for “at-risk” drivers

Feeds Predictive Models: Enhances forecasting of supply-demand gaps

Summary:
By applying a data-driven churn benchmark based on ride inactivity, we can identify driver attrition early, improve retention strategies, and ensure a balanced driver-rider ecosystem
